docs/src/client.md, before:

# Client operations

Client operations involve querying data from one or several XPA servers or
sending data to one or several XPA servers.


## Persistent client connection

For each client request, XPA is able to automatically establish a temporary
connection to the server.  This however implies some overheads and, to speed up
the connection, a persistent XPA client can be created by calling
[`XPA.Client()`](@ref) which returns an opaque object.  The
connection is automatically shutdown and related resources freed when the
client object is garbage collected.  The `close()` method can also by applied
to the client object, in that case all subsequent requests with the object will
establish a (slow) temporary connection.


## Getting data from one or more servers

### Available methods

To query something from one or more XPA servers, call [`XPA.get`](@ref) method:

```julia
XPA.get([xpa,] apt, args...) -> rep
```

which uses the client connection `xpa` to retrieve data from one or more XPA
access points identified by `apt` as a result of the command build from
arguments `args...`.  Argument `xpa` is optional, if it is not specified, a
(slow) temporary connection is established.  The XPA access point `apt` is a
string which can be a template name, a `host:port` string or the name of a Unix
socket file.  The utility [`XPA.list()`](@ref) can be called to list available
servers.  The arguments `args...` are automatically converted into a single
command string where the arguments are separated by a single space.

For instance:

```julia
julia> XPA.list()
1-element Array{XPA.AccessPoint,1}:
 XPA.AccessPoint("DS9", "ds9", "7f000001:44805", "eric", 0x0000000000000003)
```

indicates that a single XPA server is available and that it is
[SAOImage-DS9](http://ds9.si.edu/site/Home.html), an astronomical tool to
display images.  The server name is `DS9:ds9` which can be matched by the
template `DS9:*`, its address is `7f000001:44805`. Either of these strings can
be used to identify this server but only the address is unique.  Indeed there
may be more than one server with class `DS9` and name `ds9`.

In order to get the address of a more specific server, you max call
[`XPA.find(ident)`](@ref) where `ident` is a regular expression or a string
template to match against the `CLASS:NAME` identifier of the server.  For
instance:

```julia
julia> addr = XPA.find(r"^DS9:")
"7f000001:44805"
```

Keywords `user` or `throwerrors` can be specified to match the name of the
owner of the server or to throw an exception if no match is found.

To query the version number of SAOImage-DS9, we can do:

```julia
rep = XPA.get("DS9:*", "version");
```

For best performances, we can do the following:

```julia
ds9 = (XPA.Client(), XPA.find(r"^DS9:"; throwerrors=true));
rep = XPA.get(ds9..., "version");
```

and use `ds9...` in all calls to `XPA.get` or `XPA.set` (described later) to
use a fast client connection to the uniquely identified SAOImage-DS9 server.

The answer, say `rep`, to the `XPA.get` request is an instance of
[`XPA.Reply`](@ref).  Various methods are available to retrieve information or
data from `rep`.  For instance, `length(rep)` yields the number of answers
which may be zero if no servers have answered the request (the maximum number
of answers can be specified via the `nmax` keyword of [`XPA.get`](@ref); by
default, `nmax=1` to retrieve at most one answer).

There may be errors or messages associated with the answers.  To check whether
the `i`-th answer has an associated error message, call the
[`XPA.has_error`](@ref) method:

```julia
XPA.has_error(rep, i=1) -> boolean
```

!!! note
    Here and in all methods related to a specific answer in a reply to
    [`XPA.get`](@ref) or [`XPA.set`](@ref) requests, the answer index `i` can
    be any integer value.  If it is not such that `1 ≤ i ≤ length(rep)`, it is
    assumed that there is no corresponding answer and an empty (or false)
    result is returned.  By default, the first answer is always assumed (as if
    `i=1`).

To check whether there are any errors, call the [`XPA.has_errors`](@ref)
method:

```julia
XPA.has_errors(rep) -> boolean
```

To avoid checking for errors for every answer to all requests, the
[`XPA.get`](@ref) method has a `throwerrors` keyword that can be set `true` in
order to automatically throw an exception if there are any errors in the
answers.

The check whether the `i`-th answer has an associated message, call the
[`XPA.has_message`](@ref) method:

```julia
XPA.has_message(rep, i=1) -> boolean
```

To retrieve the message (perhaps an error message), call the
[`XPA.get_message`](@ref) method:

```julia
XPA.get_message(rep, i=1) -> string
```

which yields a string, possibly empty if there are no associated message with
the `i`-th answer in `rep` or if `i` is out of range.

To retrieve the identity of the server which answered the request, call the
[`XPA.get_server`](@ref) method:

```julia
XPA.get_server(rep, i=1) -> string
```

Usually the most interesting part of a particular answer is its data part which
can be extracted with the [`XPA.get_data`](@ref) method.  The general syntax to
retrieve the data associated with the `i`-th answer in `rep` is:

```julia
XPA.get_data([T, [dims,]], rep, i=1; preserve=false) -> data
```

where optional arguments `T` (a type) and `dims` (a list of dimensions) may be
used to specify how to interpret the data.  If they are not specified, a vector
of bytes (`Vector{UInt8}`) is returned.

!!! note
    For efficiency reason, copying the associated data is avoided if possible.
    This means that a call to [`XPA.get_data`](@ref) can *steal* the data and
    subsequent calls will behave as if the data part of the answer is empty.
    To avoid this (and force copying the data), use keyword `preserve=true` in
    calls to [`XPA.get_data`](@ref).  Data are always preserved when a `String`
    is extracted from the associated data.

Assuming `rep` is the result of some [`XPA.get`](@ref) or [`XPA.set`](@ref)
request, the following lines of pseudo-code illustrate the roles of the
optional `T` and `dims` arguments:

```julia
XPA.get_data(rep, i=1; preserve=false) -> buf::Vector{UInt8}
XPA.get_data(String, rep, i=1; preserve=false) -> str::String
XPA.get_data(Vector{S}, [len,] rep, i=1; preserve=false) -> vec::Vector{S}
XPA.get_data(Array{S}, (dim1, ..., dimN), rep, i=1; preserve=false) -> arr::Array{S,N}
XPA.get_data(Array{S,N}, (dim1, ..., dimN), rep, i=1; preserve=false) -> arr::Array{S,N}
```

here `buf` is a vector of bytes, `str` is a string, `vec` is a vector of `len`
elements of type `S` (if `len` is unspecified, the length of the vector is the
maximum possible given the actual size of the associated data) and `arr` is an
`N`-dimensional array whose element type is `S` and dimensions `dim1, ...,
dimN`.

If you are only interested in the data associated to a single answer, you may
directly specify arguments `T` and `dims` in the [`XPA.get`](@ref) call:

```julia
XPA.get(String, [xpa,] apt, args...) -> str::String
XPA.get(Vector{S}, [len,] [xpa,] apt, args...) -> vec::Vector{S}
XPA.get(Array{S}, (dim1, ..., dimN), [xpa,] apt, args...) -> arr::Array{S,N}
XPA.get_data(Array{S,N}, (dim1, ..., dimN), [xpa,] apt, args...) -> arr::Array{S,N}
```

In that case, exactly one answer and no errors are expected from the request
(as if `nmax=1` and `throwerrors=true` were specified).


## Examples

The following examples assume that you have created an XPA client connection
and identified the address of a SAOImage-DS9 server.  For instance:

```julia
using XPA
conn = XPA.Client()
addr = split(XPA.get_server(XPA.get(conn, "DS9:*", "version"; nmax=1, throwerrors=true)); keepempty=false)[2]
ds9 = (conn, addr)
```

To retrieve the version as a string:

```julia
julia> XPA.get(String, ds9..., "version")
"ds9 8.0.1\n"
```

To split the answer in (non-empty) words:

```julia
split(XPA.get(String, ds9..., "version"); keepempty=false)
```

You may use keyword `keepempty=true` in `split(...)` to keep empty strings in
the result.

To retrieve the answer as (non-empty) lines:

```julia
split(XPA.get(String, ds9..., "about"), r"\n|\r\n?"; keepempty=false)
```

To retrieve the dimensions of the current image:

```julia
map(s -> parse(Int, s), split(XPA.get(String, ds9..., "fits size"); keepempty=false))
```


## Sending data to one or more servers

The [`XPA.set`](@ref) method is called to send a command and some optional data
to a server.  The general syntax is:

```julia
XPA.set([xpa,] apt, args...; data=nothing) -> rep
```

which sends `data` to one or more XPA access points identified by `apt` with
arguments `args...` (automatically converted into a single string where the
arguments are separated by a single space).  As with [`XPA.get`](@ref), the
result is an instance of [`XPA.Reply`](@ref).  See the documentation of
[`XPA.get`](@ref) for explanations about how to manipulate such a result.

The [`XPA.set`](@ref) method accepts the same keywords as [`XPA.get`](@ref)
plus the `data` keyword used to specify the data to send to the server(s).  Its
value may be `nothing`, an array or a string.  If it is an array, it must have
contiguous elements (as a for a *dense* array) and must implement the `pointer`
method.  By default, `data=nothing` which means that no data are sent to the
server(s), just the command string made of the arguments `args...`.


## Messages

The returned messages string are of the form:

```julia
XPA$ERROR message (class:name ip:port)
```

or

```julia
XPA$MESSAGE message (class:name ip:port)
```

depending whether an error or an informative message has been set (with
`XPA.error()` or `XPA.message()` respectively).  Note that when there is an
error stored in an messages entry, the corresponding data buffers may or may
not be empty, depending on the particularities of the server.

Commit message:

XPA.find yields an AccessPoint, user="*" by default

docs/src/client.md, after:

# Client operations

Client operations involve querying data from one or several XPA servers or
sending data to one or several XPA servers.


## Persistent client connection

For each client request, XPA is able to automatically establish a temporary
connection to the server.  This however implies some overheads and, to speed up
the connection, a persistent XPA client can be created by calling
[`XPA.Client()`](@ref) which returns an opaque object.  The
connection is automatically shutdown and related resources freed when the
client object is garbage collected.  The `close()` method can also by applied
to the client object, in that case all subsequent requests with the object will
establish a (slow) temporary connection.


## Getting data from one or more servers

### Available methods

To query something from one or more XPA servers, call [`XPA.get`](@ref) method:

```julia
XPA.get([xpa,] apt, args...) -> rep
```

which uses the client connection `xpa` to retrieve data from one or more XPA
access points identified by `apt` as a result of the command build from
arguments `args...`.  Argument `xpa` is optional, if it is not specified, a
(slow) temporary connection is established.  The XPA access point `apt` is a
string which can be a template name, a `host:port` string or the name of a Unix
socket file.

The utility [`XPA.list()`](@ref) can be called to list available servers.  The
arguments `args...` are automatically converted into a single command string
where the arguments are separated by a single space.  For instance:

```julia
julia> XPA.list()
1-element Array{XPA.AccessPoint,1}:
 XPA.AccessPoint("DS9", "ds9", "7f000001:44805", "eric", 0x0000000000000003)
```

indicates that a single XPA server is available and that it is
[SAOImage-DS9](http://ds9.si.edu/site/Home.html), an astronomical tool to
display images.  The server name is `DS9:ds9` which can be matched by the
template `DS9:*`, its address is `7f000001:44805`. Either of these strings can
be used to identify this server but only the address is unique.  Indeed there
may be more than one server with class `DS9` and name `ds9`.

In order to get the address of a more specific server, you may call
[`XPA.find(ident)`](@ref) where `ident` is a regular expression or a string
template to match against the `CLASS:NAME` identifier of the server.  For
instance:

```julia
julia> addr = XPA.find(r"^DS9:").addr
"7f000001:44805"
```

The above example will fail if no match is found as [`XPA.find(ident)`](@ref)
yields `nothing` in that case.  A better usage is:

```julia
julia> apt = XPA.find(r"^DS9:")
julia> addr = (apt === nothing ? nothing : apt.addr)
"7f000001:44805"
```

You can also set the `throwerrors` keyword to `true` to throw an exception if
no match is found.

The keywords `user` can be specified to match the name of the owner of the
server.  For instance:

```julia
julia> apt = XPA.find(r"^DS9:"; user=ENV["USER"])
```

to only match the servers owned by you.

To query the version number of SAOImage-DS9, we can do:

```julia
rep = XPA.get("DS9:*", "version");
```

For best performances, we can do the following:

```julia
ds9 = (XPA.Client(), XPA.find(r"^DS9:"; throwerrors=true));
rep = XPA.get(ds9..., "version");
```

and use `ds9...` in all calls to `XPA.get` or `XPA.set` (described later) to
use a fast client connection to the uniquely identified SAOImage-DS9 server.

The answer, say `rep`, to the `XPA.get` request is an instance of
[`XPA.Reply`](@ref).  Various methods are available to retrieve information or
data from `rep`.  For instance, `length(rep)` yields the number of answers
which may be zero if no servers have answered the request (the maximum number
of answers can be specified via the `nmax` keyword of [`XPA.get`](@ref); by
default, `nmax=1` to retrieve at most one answer).

There may be errors or messages associated with the answers.  To check whether
the `i`-th answer has an associated error message, call the
[`XPA.has_error`](@ref) method:

```julia
XPA.has_error(rep, i=1) -> boolean
```

!!! note
    Here and in all methods related to a specific answer in a reply to
    [`XPA.get`](@ref) or [`XPA.set`](@ref) requests, the answer index `i` can
    be any integer value.  If it is not such that `1 ≤ i ≤ length(rep)`, it is
    assumed that there is no corresponding answer and an empty (or false)
    result is returned.  By default, the first answer is always assumed (as if
    `i=1`).

To check whether there are any errors, call the [`XPA.has_errors`](@ref)
method:

```julia
XPA.has_errors(rep) -> boolean
```

To avoid checking for errors for every answer to all requests, the
[`XPA.get`](@ref) method has a `throwerrors` keyword that can be set `true` in
order to automatically throw an exception if there are any errors in the
answers.

The check whether the `i`-th answer has an associated message, call the
[`XPA.has_message`](@ref) method:

```julia
XPA.has_message(rep, i=1) -> boolean
```

To retrieve the message (perhaps an error message), call the
[`XPA.get_message`](@ref) method:

```julia
XPA.get_message(rep, i=1) -> string
```

which yields a string, possibly empty if there are no associated message with
the `i`-th answer in `rep` or if `i` is out of range.

To retrieve the identity of the server which answered the request, call the
[`XPA.get_server`](@ref) method:

```julia
XPA.get_server(rep, i=1) -> string
```

Usually the most interesting part of a particular answer is its data part which
can be extracted with the [`XPA.get_data`](@ref) method.  The general syntax to
retrieve the data associated with the `i`-th answer in `rep` is:

```julia
XPA.get_data([T, [dims,]], rep, i=1; preserve=false) -> data
```

where optional arguments `T` (a type) and `dims` (a list of dimensions) may be
used to specify how to interpret the data.  If they are not specified, a vector
of bytes (`Vector{UInt8}`) is returned.

!!! note
    For efficiency reason, copying the associated data is avoided if possible.
    This means that a call to [`XPA.get_data`](@ref) can *steal* the data and
    subsequent calls will behave as if the data part of the answer is empty.
    To avoid this (and force copying the data), use keyword `preserve=true` in
    calls to [`XPA.get_data`](@ref).  Data are always preserved when a `String`
    is extracted from the associated data.

Assuming `rep` is the result of some [`XPA.get`](@ref) or [`XPA.set`](@ref)
request, the following lines of pseudo-code illustrate the roles of the
optional `T` and `dims` arguments:

```julia
XPA.get_data(rep, i=1; preserve=false) -> buf::Vector{UInt8}
XPA.get_data(String, rep, i=1; preserve=false) -> str::String
XPA.get_data(Vector{S}, [len,] rep, i=1; preserve=false) -> vec::Vector{S}
XPA.get_data(Array{S}, (dim1, ..., dimN), rep, i=1; preserve=false) -> arr::Array{S,N}
XPA.get_data(Array{S,N}, (dim1, ..., dimN), rep, i=1; preserve=false) -> arr::Array{S,N}
```

here `buf` is a vector of bytes, `str` is a string, `vec` is a vector of `len`
elements of type `S` (if `len` is unspecified, the length of the vector is the
maximum possible given the actual size of the associated data) and `arr` is an
`N`-dimensional array whose element type is `S` and dimensions `dim1, ...,
dimN`.

If you are only interested in the data associated to a single answer, you may
directly specify arguments `T` and `dims` in the [`XPA.get`](@ref) call:

```julia
XPA.get(String, [xpa,] apt, args...) -> str::String
XPA.get(Vector{S}, [len,] [xpa,] apt, args...) -> vec::Vector{S}
XPA.get(Array{S}, (dim1, ..., dimN), [xpa,] apt, args...) -> arr::Array{S,N}
XPA.get_data(Array{S,N}, (dim1, ..., dimN), [xpa,] apt, args...) -> arr::Array{S,N}
```

In that case, exactly one answer and no errors are expected from the request
(as if `nmax=1` and `throwerrors=true` were specified).


## Examples

The following examples assume that you have created an XPA client connection
and identified the address of a SAOImage-DS9 server.  For instance:

```julia
using XPA
conn = XPA.Client()
addr = split(XPA.get_server(XPA.get(conn, "DS9:*", "version"; nmax=1, throwerrors=true)); keepempty=false)[2]
ds9 = (conn, addr)
```

To retrieve the version as a string:

```julia
julia> XPA.get(String, ds9..., "version")
"ds9 8.0.1\n"
```

To split the answer in (non-empty) words:

```julia
split(XPA.get(String, ds9..., "version"); keepempty=false)
```

You may use keyword `keepempty=true` in `split(...)` to keep empty strings in
the result.

To retrieve the answer as (non-empty) lines:

```julia
split(XPA.get(String, ds9..., "about"), r"\n|\r\n?"; keepempty=false)
```

To retrieve the dimensions of the current image:

```julia
map(s -> parse(Int, s), split(XPA.get(String, ds9..., "fits size"); keepempty=false))
```


## Sending data to one or more servers

The [`XPA.set`](@ref) method is called to send a command and some optional data
to a server.  The general syntax is:

```julia
XPA.set([xpa,] apt, args...; data=nothing) -> rep
```

which sends `data` to one or more XPA access points identified by `apt` with
arguments `args...` (automatically converted into a single string where the
arguments are separated by a single space).  As with [`XPA.get`](@ref), the
result is an instance of [`XPA.Reply`](@ref).  See the documentation of
[`XPA.get`](@ref) for explanations about how to manipulate such a result.

The [`XPA.set`](@ref) method accepts the same keywords as [`XPA.get`](@ref)
plus the `data` keyword used to specify the data to send to the server(s).  Its
value may be `nothing`, an array or a string.  If it is an array, it must have
contiguous elements (as a for a *dense* array) and must implement the `pointer`
method.  By default, `data=nothing` which means that no data are sent to the
server(s), just the command string made of the arguments `args...`.


## Messages

The returned messages string are of the form:

```julia
XPA$ERROR message (class:name ip:port)
```

or

```julia
XPA$MESSAGE message (class:name ip:port)
```

depending whether an error or an informative message has been set (with
`XPA.error()` or `XPA.message()` respectively).  Note that when there is an
error stored in an messages entry, the corresponding data buffers may or may
not be empty, depending on the particularities of the server.
